docs/future_improvements.md, before:

# Future Improvements

The following are ideas for how the product could be enhanced in the future.

## User Management

There are currently no user restrictions on shorts. This means that any user from the public internet can create
shorts and remove shorts. This is not sufficient as it allows anyone to remove anyone elses shorts.

One solution would be to "roll our own" user management. This is okay for a small scale project as one can own
their own code. There are also lots of helper libraries such as Devise.

Another option, depending on the business requirements, are to use an external service to manage users. Such
options include [Auth0](https://auth0.com/) and [Aws Cognito](https://aws.amazon.com/cognito/). These solutions
are great because they offer features that would be extremely difficult to implement on our own such as
external identity providers (Google, Facebook, Apple, etc.), multi-factor authentication and security updates.
Of course, not every organization will be comfortable exporting this functionality to an external partner.

## Analytics

It would be useful if we could see the number of uses of each short. This can be a tricky situation especially
if scale is involved. I would _not_ recommend keeping a counter on the `shorts` table itself because this would
involve a write for every access, though it would work in the short term.

A longer term solution would be an asynchronous action that would take the short URL and create an event in a
scalable manner. This could start out with something like [Sidekiq](https://github.com/mperham/sidekiq) or
[Aws SQS](https://aws.amazon.com/sqs/) acting as the async barrier and a write to
another PostgreSQL table or Redis cache. A more long term solution would be to an event stream such as
[Kafka](https://kafka.apache.org/), [Aws Kinesis) or [Google Cloud Pub/Sub](https://cloud.google.com/pubsub) to
take in an event stream of activity and then a service on the other side to store these
records, perhaps to a data store ([MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/), etc.) or a
[data lake](https://aws.amazon.com/big-data/datalakes-and-analytics/what-is-a-data-lake/)
(using [S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/)).

## Short URL Recovery

Short URLs currently live forever or until a user destroys them. We could set an arbitrary time limit to each
short such that they will be recovered from the pool. This could be only a time limit (six or 12 months), or
also include time since last used if we had those analytics available.

I would recommend doing this as an asynchronous process though a worker such as
[Sidekiq](https://github.com/mperham/sidekiq). A cron job could be setup to run every day that looked for
matching recoverable shorts and recover them.

## Speed/Scale Improvements

There are a few ideas that would enhance the speed or scale of the app.

### Short URL Generation

The current mechanism for generating short URLs generates a random code and checks that the code isn't already
taken. If we instead had a deterministic way of creating a code in `O(1)` time, we could ensure that a new code
will be fast(er) to be generated and that each new random code will be successful regardless of the scale.

Commit message:

Adding documentation for authorization
* Update api spec with details
* Update future improvements
* Add design notes

docs/future_improvements.md, after:

# Future Improvements

The following are ideas for how the product could be enhanced in the future.

## Additional User Management

If user accounts were desired in the future, one solution would be to "roll our own" user management.
This is okay for a small scale project as one can own their own code.
There are also lots of helper libraries such as Devise.

Another option, depending on the business requirements, are to use an external service to manage users. Such
options include [Auth0](https://auth0.com/) and [Aws Cognito](https://aws.amazon.com/cognito/). These solutions
are great because they offer features that would be extremely difficult to implement on our own such as
external identity providers (Google, Facebook, Apple, etc.), multi-factor authentication and security updates.
Of course, not every organization will be comfortable exporting this functionality to an external partner.
A working example of such a setup with Auth0 can be seen in
[this branch](https://github.com/truggeri/rails-url-shortener/tree/auth0-exp).

## Analytics

It would be useful if we could see the number of uses of each short. This can be a tricky situation especially
if scale is involved. I would _not_ recommend keeping a counter on the `shorts` table itself because this would
involve a write for every access, though it would work in the short term.

A longer term solution would be an asynchronous action that would take the short URL and create an event in a
scalable manner. This could start out with something like [Sidekiq](https://github.com/mperham/sidekiq) or
[Aws SQS](https://aws.amazon.com/sqs/) acting as the async barrier and a write to
another PostgreSQL table or Redis cache. A more long term solution would be to an event stream such as
[Kafka](https://kafka.apache.org/), [Aws Kinesis) or [Google Cloud Pub/Sub](https://cloud.google.com/pubsub) to
take in an event stream of activity and then a service on the other side to store these
records, perhaps to a data store ([MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/), etc.) or a
[data lake](https://aws.amazon.com/big-data/datalakes-and-analytics/what-is-a-data-lake/)
(using [S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/)).

## Short URL Recovery

Short URLs currently live forever or until a user destroys them. We could set an arbitrary time limit to each
short such that they will be recovered from the pool. This could be only a time limit (six or 12 months), or
also include time since last used if we had those analytics available.

I would recommend doing this as an asynchronous process though a worker such as
[Sidekiq](https://github.com/mperham/sidekiq). A cron job could be setup to run every day that looked for
matching recoverable shorts and recover them.

## Speed/Scale Improvements

There are a few ideas that would enhance the speed or scale of the app.

### Short URL Generation

The current mechanism for generating short URLs generates a random code and checks that the code isn't already
taken. If we instead had a deterministic way of creating a code in `O(1)` time, we could ensure that a new code
will be fast(er) to be generated and that each new random code will be successful regardless of the scale.
